![](http://ilssa.web.unc.edu/files/2015/04/sils_logo.jpg)

Cole Gibson

INLS 585

Nina Exner

Summary
=======

Our project will be to assist our patrons in the shift from Dewey
classification to Library of Congress classification. The main benefits
for this project is to educate our patrons on Library of Congress
classification and to foster a community of assistance between our
patrons and our reference staff. It will also serve as an excellent
opportunity for our staff to gain experience in instruction. Our main
methods to educate our patrons will be through the use of community
events that will be held every two months as well as to create
educational material that will be used in these instructional sessions.
These materials will also be able at our reference desk for public
consumption. We expect that the budget will be low cost and that
operational workflow will be negligibly affected. Our patrons will be
assessed through surveys and through data mining of reference questions
to see the impact of this project as well as to actively update and
improve the instructional capabilities of the project.

Organization Description
========================

Our organization is a small private university library founded by a
religious institution. It services mainly undergraduate students. While
the university was initially founded with religious teachings in mind
the university has in recent times begun to switch to a more liberal
arts style university and the three main programs of the school have
shifted to a social science leaning. The library hosts a mainly mono
graphic collection with a heavy focus in collecting religious texts and
scholarly writings, social science scholarship, and a sizable adult
fiction section. It consists of a small staff of information professions
with a dozen student employees who assist with page duties such as
shelving and desk operations. All staff assist with desk
responsibilities and the organization is very flat. There is a library
director who communicates with university executives to negotiate budget
concerns as well as to organize the library's marketing and community
outreach. The other departments that the library contain are a technical
services, reference, and circulation departments. The departments do not
have a director for the individual departments but employees with
seniority tend to be placed into management roles as well as project
leads.

This project will consist of a team of five members who will be drawn
from the reference department as well as one individual from technical
services. There will be three reference employees who are all trained in
liaison style reference and are well acquainted with working the
reference desk, receiving reference questions through both email and
chat systems, as well as roaming reference. Each of these employees are
also educated in various classification systems but have more experience
with using Dewey classification. The one individual from technical
services will serve as an assist to the reference librarians for when an
issue with the catalog system occurs. They will also be ensuring that
materials are properly labeled with Library of Congress classification.
The final member of the team will be the project lead and they will be
the library director. The library director will be the lead due to their
familiarity with working both with the greater community and the
university executives. They are also an individual who can draw the
employees from different departments into a more cohesive unit.

Goals and Outcomes
==================

The overall outcome for this project is to have patrons of the library
be comfortable with the changes from Dewey classification to Library of
Congress classification. This plan has been chosen because of its
emphasis on education through workshops and events occurring after
normal operational hours. Additionally this plan limits the daily time
cost on our employees. This plan also has a number of benefits for our
stakeholders such as:

-   “Education in Library of Congress classification”

-   “Additional classes for patrons”

-   “Additional access to reference librarians”

Action Plan
===========

The team members for this project consist of the library director,
Director, three reference librarians; Reference 1, Reference 2, and
Reference 3, as well as a member of technical services, Cataloger. A
description of each member's job and responsibilities can be found in
the appendix.

At the start of the project there will be a team meeting that will
address the classification changes and to re familiarize the team with
Library of Congress classification. Each member of the project can
expect an additional meeting each month to check on progress and to
assess how the project is meeting the goals outlined.

Following the initial meeting the reference librarians will meet to
coordinate when the community events will take place and how to best
structure each instructional meeting. The reference librarians can
expect to have community events every two months for the first 6 months
of the project timeline that will be held outside of normal library
operating hours. There will also be an initial creation of multimedia
educational tools before the community events take place that will be
completed by Cataloger and then passed to the reference librarians for
distribution. After each event patrons will also be given surveys on how
the event went to give the reference librarians insight into how to best
build their instruction.

After the first six months a formal assessment will occur that will poll
patrons on how they understand the classification changes as well as to
count up the reference questions regarding the classification changes.
This will ensure that the community events are helpful and that the
information is being successfully transferred to the patrons. There will
also be a second meeting among the reference librarians to assess if any
more events need to be held after the first six months.

In regards to negative affects to daily workflow we expect that
initially reference services will see an increase of traffic and
questions while patrons get used to the classification changes but that
throughout the year with the help of the community events and
educational materials that these questions will diminish to a more
normal level.

Departmental Outcomes
---------------------

The department expects to having the following benefits occur through
this project plan:

-   “Negligible affect on day to day operations”

-   “Opportunity for individual growth in teaching and instruction”

-   “Opportunity for greater outreach opportunities within our academic
     community.”

-   “Opportunity for our library to gain a better understanding of our
     academic community through assessment.”

Risks and Costs
---------------

-   ### Budget

    -   The budget will be a low cost expenditure due to low material
         needs and slightly enhanced pay for overtime work for
         community events.

-   ### Team-building

    -   The team will have monthly meetings to refocus and to assess
         their own performances in regards to the community events and
         any questions they have received while working within
         reference services. They will additionally have the ability to
         meet one on one with the project lead at a requested appointed
         time to individually go over any issues that they are having
         with the classification changes. In terms of team-building the
         team will have a couple of months of collaborative work before
         the community events begin as well as the events themselves to
         understand how best to work together. The events will help to
         showcase the particular skills of each team member through the
         creation of educational materials or the instruction
         of patrons.

-   ### Timeline

Table: Projected schedule for the project during the academic year.

 Action                Jun Jul Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May 
 --------------------- --- --- --- ---- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 
 Starting Meeting        X                                                                                        
 Creation of Materials   X   X                                                                       
 Coordination Meetings       X                        X                                        
 Community Events                X        X       X                                                  
 Follow-up Meetings      X   X   X    X   X   X   X   X                                        
 Patron Assessment                    X               X   X   X   X   X 
  
Table: Team members action responsiblities for the project.

 Action                Director Reference 1 Reference 2 Reference 3 Cataloger 
 --------------------- -------- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------- 
 Starting Meeting             X           X           X           X         X 
 Creation of Materials                                                      X 
 Coordination Meetings                    X           X           X                      
 Community Events                         X           X           X                      
 Follow-up Meetings           X           X           X           X         X        
 Patron Assessment                        X           X           X           
  

Appendix
========

Director position
-----------------

The Executive Director is the chief administrative officer of the
Libraries and reports to the Provost and Senior Vice President for
Academic Affairs. The successful candidate is expected to bring a vision
for the future that will inspire their colleagues to pursue a higher
standard of excellence for teaching/librarianship, service, and
scholarship.

The Executive director contributes to the University's academic and
development missions, including: enhancement and support of quality
academic programs and scholarship/creative activity; strategic planning,
budgeting, and program development; faculty and staff development;
support for campus recruitment, enrollment, and retention efforts;
enhancement of USA's tradition of serving minority, international,
first-generation students, and students with disabilities; and resource
development through fundraising and sponsored programs

Qualifications:

-Master's in library and/or information science from an ALA-accredited
library program. A doctorate in library and/or information science or
second master's degree is preferred;

-Distinguished record of teaching/librarianship, research/creative
activity, and service consistent with the qualifications for appointment
at rank of Senior Librarian;

-A minimum of seven years of experience in academic library
administration including strategic planning, budget management, and
staff supervision with progressively increasing responsibilities, with
preference given to candidates with at least five years of upper-level
administrative responsibility;

-Experience in personnel, student matters, and promotion and tenure
review is preferred;

-Commitment to cultural diversity and equal opportunity (demonstrated
knowledge, skills and abilities in diversity and cultural competency are
preferred);

-Leadership ability to provide strategic direction for Library Affairs
in a rapidly changing environment;

-Demonstrated commitment to student success through library services and
programs;

-Active participation in state, regional, and national library and
professional organizations;

-Demonstrated ability to develop and sustain collegial and productive
relationships with on- and off-campus constituencies;

-Excellent organizational and communication skills.

Adapted from the University of South Alabama Executive Director of
University Libraries job advertisement.

![](https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/c8/70/48/c8704860c654606de3fda6eaa681d584.jpg)

[*http://joblist.ala.org/jobseeker/job/30394601/Executive%20Director%20of%20University%20Libraries/University%20of%20South%20Alabama,%20Marx%20Library/?str=26&new=1&max=25&vnet=0&long=1*](http://joblist.ala.org/jobseeker/job/30394601/Executive%20Director%20of%20University%20Libraries/University%20of%20South%20Alabama,%20Marx%20Library/?str=26&new=1&max=25&vnet=0&long=1)[](http://joblist.ala.org/jobseeker/job/30394601/Executive%20Director%20of%20University%20Libraries/University%20of%20South%20Alabama,%20Marx%20Library/?str=26&new=1&max=25&vnet=0&long=1)

Reference Librarian position (3)
--------------------------------

Duties and Responsibilities:

-   Provides reference and specialized research assistance to students,
     faculty, administrators, staff, alumni and others permitted access
     to library services.

-   Provides research assistance and instruction directly to these
     groups, at the reference desk, by phone, email, and in individual
     consultations by appointment.

-   Serves as library liaison to faculty to support their research and
     teaching interests.

-   Develops expertise in areas of law related to the law school
     curriculum and faculty research.

-   Provides research instruction in the classroom.

-   Participates in collection development in all formats.

-   Develops, creates and maintains online research guides.

-   Contributes to the Library's social media presence.

-   Participates in other duties as needed.

Required Qualifications:

-   MLS or equivalent from ALA accredited library school.

-   Ability to work independently and as a team member.

-   Excellent knowledge of both traditional and electronic
     legal resources.

-   Demonstrated commitment to emerging library practices and
     technologies and their application to instruction.

-   Strong service orientation.

-   Excellent written, oral, and interpersonal communication skills.

-   Library experience preferred.

-   Instruction or presentation experience preferred.

Adapted from the Seton Hall University Reference Librarian job
advertisement.

[*http://jobs.shu.edu/cw/en-us/job/492638/reference-librarian*](http://jobs.shu.edu/cw/en-us/job/492638/reference-librarian)

![](https://images.efollett.com/htmlroot/images/templates/storeLogos/CA/544.gif)

Cataloger position
------------------

This position provides the technical support for customers to define
library specific cataloging specifications and may serve as the project
manager for libraries opening new branches or supplementing collections
in existing branches to implement these specifications. This position
also supports production by training in house catalogers and providing
technical assistance for project implementation.

-   Manage, define and translate library specific cataloging
     specifications for customer projects to include opening day
     collections as well as ongoing acquisitions.

-   Train catalogers (in both large and small groups) on library
     specific cataloging specifications as well as standard, core
     cataloging specifications.

-   Work with the IT department to create customer
     cataloging interfaces.

-   Catalog live in library systems.

-   Conduct research, prepare reports, and participate in meetings
     as needed.

-   Keep current on trends and developments in the industry, in general,
     and in cataloging processes, in particular.

-   Cross training and substitution of tasks that may be of higher
     classification as required to include supervision of cataloging
     personnel in absence of supervisor.

Qualifications
--------------

-   Masters Degree in Library Science; supplemented by one year previous experience and/or training involving library services. In addition, the candidate must have specialized coursework in and/or demonstrated knowledge of cataloging.

-   PC proficiency and familiarity with computer systems and databases.

-   Demonstrated understanding of cataloging rules; Marc format, AACR2r,
     RDA, etc.

-   Accomplished research and communication skills, including public
     speaking experience.

-   Experience using automated library systems (Horizon, III,
     Polaris, etc.)

-   Experience using OCLC.

-   Knowledge of project management principles with the ability to
     effectively plan, organize, and prioritize tasks according to
     schedules and goals .

-   Ability to work as a team player.

-   Ability and willingness to maintain a high level of accuracy and
     attention to detail.

-   Ability to learn job-related functions such as company computer
     systems and operation of specialized equipment and databases,
     primarily through oral instruction and observation, offered
     through on-the-job training.

-   Normal office environment with some exposure to a
     production environment.

-   Travel as required to selected events and customer libraries.

Adapted from the Brodart Co. Librarian - Cataloging Services job
advertisement

[*https://www.paycomonline.net/v4/ats/index.php?/job/apply&clientkey=A0875C7261A4E4F12E15ED2E5EA8D317&job=30951*](https://www.paycomonline.net/v4/ats/index.php?/job/apply&clientkey=A0875C7261A4E4F12E15ED2E5EA8D317&job=30951)

![](https://www.mcls.org/files/5114/0353/7864/brodart_logo_100x96px.jpg)
[](https://www.paycomonline.net/v4/ats/index.php?/job/apply&clientkey=A0875C7261A4E4F12E15ED2E5EA8D317&job=30951)